---
layout: post
title:  "Big Data Epistemology in Industry & Academia"
date:   2018-06-22 19:00
categories: 
---
<h1>The Epistemology of Behavioral Big Data (BBD) According to Social Scientists</h1>
In their foundational piece on the sociology of data analysis, boyd and Crawford (2012) build on the post-positivist philosophy of French philosopher Bruno Latour, by arguing that “all researchers are interpreters of data” and that the data cleaning process is “inherently subjective.” They quote David Bollier who points out that the process of data cleaning forces analysts to make decisions about what to count, how to count, and perhaps even more importantly, what not to count when building up the data sets used as inputs to predictive models. These decisions are certainly non-trivial, as any professional data scientist can attest to. 

<p>Under boyd and Crawford’s interpretation of BBD, analytical decisions can be seen as reflections of a particular social, political, and economic context, even if shrouded under the “objectivity” of science or mathematics. Further, as Kitchin writes, “making sense of data is always framed” and that even the algorithms used to analyze data are “imbued with particular values and contextualized within a particular scientific approach.” In short, boyd and Crawford and other social scientists believe that BBD analysis cannot be divorced from the biases and limitations of the analyst. Those supportive of boyd & Crawford’s views argue that we rightly ought to be skeptical when presented with analyses whose conclusions run counter to common sense or prevailing theory.</p>

<h1>The Epistemology of BBD According to Industry</h1>
<p>In stark contrast to boyd and Crawford’s views, others, more in the camp of industry practitioners of BBD, exalt what Kitchin refers to as “empiricism reborn,” in which mere correlation is both necessary and sufficient and [analysts] no longer have to “make educated guesses and construct hypotheses or models” and test them with data. In the world of industry, particularly marketing and retail, “prediction trumps explanation.” The most prominent of these “new empiricists” is Anderson (of Wired magazine fame) who, in a controversial piece, contends that “with enough data, numbers speak for themselves” and consequently domain knowledge and apriori causal models are “obsolete”.</p>
<p>
Kitchin observes that this type of attitude is most often found in data scientists who were trained as computer scientists and physicists and are now doing work with a heavy BBD component. Regarding their analysis of social processes within cities, Kitchin comments that they “willingly ignore a couple of centuries of social science scholarship on the topic” and the result is “reductionist, functionalist [and] ignores the effects of culture, politics, policy, governance, and capital.” BJ Strasser suggests that a similar debate is underway in the biological sciences regarding the question of who is the “most legitimate producer of knowledge: the museum collector… or the statistician analyzing the data?”</p>

<h1>Big Data Hubris</h1>
<p>This tension between the more traditional “hard” sciences and the relatively new interdisciplinary domain of data science likely will not be resolved any time soon. On the one hand, traditional fields should be welcoming of these newcomers as they may bring novel methods to previously intractable problems. On the other hand, leaving complicated analysis to people with little domain expertise can easily lead to spurious and inaccurate conclusions reminiscent of what Lazer (2014) calls “big data hubris,” whereby analysts draw faulty inferences based on huge amounts of data that were not properly obtained or measured in the first place. Until universities begin training more data scientists with a background in both social science and machine learning we can expect this divide to persist.</p>
