---
layout: post
title: "What's the Most Hygienic Mexican Food in LA?"
date: "2018-08-18"
comments: true
maps: true
---
-   [Mapping The Most Hygienic Mexican Food in LA](#mapping-the-most-hygienic-mexican-food-in-la)
-   [Observations](#observations)

Mapping The Most Hygienic Mexican Food in LA
============================================

For this map analysis, we will combine spatial polygons dataframes with LA Open Data to geo-locate the Mexican restaurants with the highest health inspection ratings. The data visualized here represent nearly four years of LA County health inspections from 2015-2018.

For restaurants with multiple inspections, I have averaged the ratings and also presented the number of health inspections at the location.

So the next time you're craving a burrito from your local tacqueria, you might want to double check the map below.


    ## Observations: 58,872
    ## Variables: 21
    ## $ serial_number       <chr> "DAHHEU0HC", "DA6USMT89", "DAFWEKIMH", "DA...
    ## $ activity_date       <chr> "03/30/2018 12:00:00 AM", "03/30/2018 12:0...
    ## $ facility_name       <chr> "MADAME MONSIEUR", "SPROUTS FARMERS MARKET...
    ## $ score               <int> 90, 97, 94, 98, 97, 96, 97, 100, 93, 90, 9...
    ## $ grade               <chr> "A", "A", "A", "A", "A", "A", "A", "A", "A...
    ## $ service_code        <int> 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, ...
    ## $ service_description <chr> "ROUTINE INSPECTION", "ROUTINE INSPECTION"...
    ## $ employee_id         <chr> "EE0000721", "EE0000162", "EE0000846", "EE...
    ## $ facility_address    <chr> "512 W 6TH ST", "2245 YOSEMITE DR", "1800 ...
    ## $ facility_city       <chr> "LOS ANGELES", "LOS ANGELES", "LOS ANGELES...
    ## $ facility_id         <chr> "FA0163135", "FA0224114", "FA0257916", "FA...
    ## $ facility_state      <chr> "CA", "CA", "CA", "CA", "CA", "CA", "CA", ...
    ## $ facility_zip        <chr> "90014", "90041-2618", "90027", "90006", "...
    ## $ owner_id            <chr> "OW0126803", "OW0033830", "OW0126873", "OW...
    ## $ owner_name          <chr> "ABK3 ENTERPRISES LLC", "SPROUTS, INC.", "...
    ## $ pe_description      <chr> "RESTAURANT (0-30) SEATS MODERATE RISK", "...
    ## $ program_element_pe  <int> 1631, 1613, 1631, 1631, 1610, 1631, 1632, ...
    ## $ program_name        <chr> "MADAME MONSIEUR", "SPROUTS FARMERS MARKET...
    ## $ program_status      <chr> "ACTIVE", "ACTIVE", "ACTIVE", "ACTIVE", "A...
    ## $ record_id           <chr> "PR0151318", "PR0179287", "PR0207867", "PR...
    ## $ zip                 <chr> "90014", "90041", "90027", "90006", "90037...

As you can see, there were about 58,000 individual health inspections over the past few years.
	
Creating The Map: Dual Layers
==============
We will have two layers to this map: the first layer will be an aggregate rating by zip code for ALL kinds of restaurants, not just Mexican restaurants. This way you can roughly gauge which parts of the city have the most sanitary conditions and where the most restaurants are located. Make sure to hover your mouse to see the popup information.

The second layer (accessible by clicking the map layers in the top right corner), shows the individual locations of all the Mexican restaurants in LA using some basic regexes. In all, there are about 214 unique restaurants displayed here. While that's probably not every single one in LA, it's probably a decent representation.

Keep in mind that the standard deviation of health scores is really quite small. Most restaurants are in the 90s. That's a good thing. In order to show relative differences, however, I've binned them into deciles so that these small differences are reflected more strikingly in the color mappings. So just because a restaurant is red doesn't mean it's not safe to eat there; it just means that relatively speaking, it's slightly less safe to eat at compared to a restaurant in blue.


{% include mexmap.html %}


Observations
============

We can see that one area, zip code 90089, is by far the most sanitary place to eat in LA. It has over 243 restaurants and an average hygiene rating of 97.

Probably the least sanitary zip code is 90020, which boasts 1624 restaurants, but has an average score of only 91.1.




